The Project Gutenberg eBook of Heart of the West

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Heart of the West


Author: O. Henry

Release date: July 27, 2004 [eBook #1725]
                Most recently updated: October 25, 2021

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEART OF THE WEST ***



HEART OF THE WEST

by O. Henry


CONTENTS

 I. Hearts and Crosses
 II. The Ransom of Mack
 III. Telemachus, Friend
 IV. The Handbook of Hymen
 V. The Pimienta Pancakes
 VI. Seats of the Haughty
 VII. Hygeia at the Solito
 VIII. An Afternoon Miracle
 IX. The Higher Abdication
 X. Cupid à la Carte
 XI. The Caballero’s Way
 XII. The Sphinx Apple
 XIII. The Missing Chord
 XIV. A Call Loan
 XV. The Princess and the Puma
 XVI. The Indian Summer of Dry Valley Johnson
 XVII. Christmas by Injunction
 XVIII. A Chaparral Prince
 XIX. The Reformation of Calliope




HEART OF THE WEST




I
HEARTS AND CROSSES


Baldy Woods reached for the bottle, and got it. Whenever Baldy went for
anything he usually—but this is not Baldy’s story. He poured out a
third drink that was larger by a finger than the first and second.
Baldy was in consultation; and the consultee is worthy of his hire.

“I’d be king if I was you,” said Baldy, so positively that his holster
creaked and his spurs rattled.

Webb Yeager pushed back his flat-brimmed Stetson, and made further
disorder in his straw-coloured hair. The tonsorial recourse being
without avail, he followed the liquid example of the more resourceful
Baldy.

“If a man marries a queen, it oughtn’t to make him a two-spot,”
declared Webb, epitomising his grievances.

“Sure not,” said Baldy, sympathetic, still thirsty, and genuinely
solicitous concerning the relative value of the cards. “By rights
you’re a king. If I was you, I’d call for a new deal. The cards have
been stacked on you—I’ll tell you what you are, Webb Yeager.”

“What?” asked Webb, with a hopeful look in his pale-blue eyes.

“You’re a prince-consort.”

“Go easy,” said Webb. “I never blackguarded you none.”

“It’s a title,” explained Baldy, “up among the picture-cards; but it
don’t take no tricks. I’ll tell you, Webb. It’s a brand they’re got for
certain animals in Europe. Say that you or me or one of them Dutch
dukes marries in a royal family. Well, by and by our wife gets to be
queen. Are we king? Not in a million years. At the coronation
ceremonies we march between little casino and the Ninth Grand Custodian
of the Royal Hall Bedchamber. The only use we are is to appear in
photographs, and accept the responsibility for the heir-apparent. That
ain’t any square deal. Yes, sir, Webb, you’re a prince-consort; and if
I was you, I’d start a interregnum or a habeus corpus or somethin’; and
I’d be king if I had to turn from the bottom of the deck.”

Baldy emptied his glass to the ratification of his Warwick pose.

“Baldy,” said Webb, solemnly, “me and you punched cows in the same
outfit for years. We been runnin’ on the same range, and ridin’ the
same trails since we was boys. I wouldn’t talk about my family affairs
to nobody but you. You was line-rider on the Nopalito Ranch when I
married Santa McAllister. I was foreman then; but what am I now? I
don’t amount to a knot in a stake rope.”

“When old McAllister was the cattle king of West Texas,” continued
Baldy with Satanic sweetness, “you was some tallow. You had as much to
say on the ranch as he did.”

“I did,” admitted Webb, “up to the time he found out I was tryin’ to
get my rope over Santa’s head. Then he kept me out on the range as far
from the ranch-house as he could. When the old man died they commenced
to call Santa the ‘cattle queen.’ I’m boss of the cattle—that’s all.
She ’tends to all the business; she handles all the money; I can’t sell
even a beef-steer to a party of campers, myself. Santa’s the ‘queen’;
and I’m Mr. Nobody.”

“I’d be king if I was you,” repeated Baldy Woods, the royalist. “When a
man marries a queen he ought to grade up with her—on the hoof—
dressed—dried—corned—any old way from the chaparral to the
packing-house. Lots of folks thinks it’s funny, Webb, that you don’t
have the say-so on the Nopalito. I ain’t reflectin’ none on Miz
Yeager—she’s the finest little lady between the Rio Grande and next
Christmas—but a man ought to be boss of his own camp.”

The smooth, brown face of Yeager lengthened to a mask of wounded
melancholy. With that expression, and his rumpled yellow hair and
guileless blue eyes, he might have been likened to a schoolboy whose
leadership had been usurped by a youngster of superior strength. But
his active and sinewy seventy-two inches, and his girded revolvers
forbade the comparison.

“What was that you called me, Baldy?” he asked. “What kind of a concert
was it?”

“A ‘consort,’” corrected Baldy—“a ‘prince-consort.’ It’s a kind of
short-card pseudonym. You come in sort of between Jack-high and a
four-card flush.”

Webb Yeager sighed, and gathered the strap of his Winchester scabbard
from the floor.

“I’m ridin’ back to the ranch to-day,” he said half-heartedly. “I’ve
got to start a bunch of beeves for San Antone in the morning.”

“I’m your company as far as Dry Lake,” announced Baldy. “I’ve got a
round-up camp on the San Marcos cuttin’ out two-year-olds.”

The two _compañeros_ mounted their ponies and trotted away from the
little railroad settlement, where they had foregathered in the thirsty
morning.

At Dry Lake, where their routes diverged, they reined up for a parting
cigarette. For miles they had ridden in silence save for the soft drum
of the ponies’ hoofs on the matted mesquite grass, and the rattle of
the chaparral against their wooden stirrups. But in Texas discourse is
seldom continuous. You may fill in a mile, a meal, and a murder between
your paragraphs without detriment to your thesis. So, without apology,
Webb offered an addendum to the conversation that had begun ten miles
away.

“You remember, yourself, Baldy, that there was a time when Santa wasn’t
quite so independent. You remember the days when old McAllister was
keepin’ us apart, and how she used to send me the sign that she wanted
to see me? Old man Mac promised to make me look like a colander if I
ever come in gun-shot of the ranch. You remember the sign she used to
send, Baldy—the heart with a cross inside of it?”

“Me?” cried Baldy, with intoxicated archness. “You old sugar-stealing
coyote! Don’t I remember! Why, you dad-blamed old long-horned
turtle-dove, the boys in camp was all cognoscious about them
hiroglyphs. The ‘gizzard-and-crossbones’ we used to call it. We used to
see ’em on truck that was sent out from the ranch. They was marked in
charcoal on the sacks of flour and in lead-pencil on the newspapers. I
see one of ’em once chalked on the back of a new cook that old man
McAllister sent out from the ranch—danged if I didn’t.”

“Santa’s father,” explained Webb gently, “got her to promise that she
wouldn’t write to me or send me any word. That heart-and-cross sign was
her scheme. Whenever she wanted to see me in particular she managed to
put that mark on somethin’ at the ranch that she knew I’d see. And I
never laid eyes on it but what I burnt the wind for the ranch the same
night. I used to see her in that coma mott back of the little
horse-corral.”

“We knowed it,” chanted Baldy; “but we never let on. We was all for
you. We knowed why you always kept that fast paint in camp. And when we
see that gizzard-and-crossbones figured out on the truck from the ranch
we knowed old Pinto was goin’ to eat up miles that night instead of
grass. You remember Scurry—that educated horse-wrangler we had— the
college fellow that tangle-foot drove to the range? Whenever Scurry saw
that come-meet-your-honey brand on anything from the ranch, he’d wave
his hand like that, and say, ‘Our friend Lee Andrews will again swim
the Hell’s point to-night.’”

“The last time Santa sent me the sign,” said Webb, “was once when she
was sick. I noticed it as soon as I hit camp, and I galloped Pinto
forty mile that night. She wasn’t at the coma mott. I went to the
house; and old McAllister met me at the door. ‘Did you come here to get
killed?’ says he; ‘I’ll disoblige you for once. I just started a
Mexican to bring you. Santa wants you. Go in that room and see her. And
then come out here and see me.’

“Santa was lyin’ in bed pretty sick. But she gives out a kind of a
smile, and her hand and mine lock horns, and I sets down by the bed—
mud and spurs and chaps and all. ‘I’ve heard you ridin’ across the
grass for hours, Webb,’ she says. ‘I was sure you’d come. You saw the
sign?’ she whispers. ‘The minute I hit camp,’ says I. ‘’Twas marked on
the bag of potatoes and onions.’ ‘They’re always together,’ says she,
soft like—‘always together in life.’ ‘They go well together,’ I says,
‘in a stew.’ ‘I mean hearts and crosses,’ says Santa. ‘Our sign—to love
and to suffer—that’s what they mean.’

“And there was old Doc Musgrove amusin’ himself with whisky and a
palm-leaf fan. And by and by Santa goes to sleep; and Doc feels her
forehead; and he says to me: ‘You’re not such a bad febrifuge. But
you’d better slide out now; for the diagnosis don’t call for you in
regular doses. The little lady’ll be all right when she wakes up.’

“I seen old McAllister outside. ‘She’s asleep,’ says I. ‘And now you
can start in with your colander-work. Take your time; for I left my gun
on my saddle-horn.’

“Old Mac laughs, and he says to me: ‘Pumpin’ lead into the best
ranch-boss in West Texas don’t seem to me good business policy. I don’t
know where I could get as good a one. It’s the son-in-law idea, Webb,
that makes me admire for to use you as a target. You ain’t my idea for
a member of the family. But I can use you on the Nopalito if you’ll
keep outside of a radius with the ranch-house in the middle of it. You
go upstairs and lay down on a cot, and when you get some sleep we’ll
talk it over.’”

Baldy Woods pulled down his hat, and uncurled his leg from his
saddle-horn. Webb shortened his rein, and his pony danced, anxious to
be off. The two men shook hands with Western ceremony.

“_Adios_, Baldy,” said Webb, “I’m glad I seen you and had this talk.”

With a pounding rush that sounded like the rise of a covey of quail,
the riders sped away toward different points of the compass. A hundred
yards on his route Baldy reined in on the top of a bare knoll, and
emitted a yell. He swayed on his horse; had he been on foot, the earth
would have risen and conquered him; but in the saddle he was a master
of equilibrium, and laughed at whisky, and despised the centre of
gravity.

Webb turned in his saddle at the signal.

“If I was you,” came Baldy’s strident and perverting tones, “I’d be
king!”

At eight o’clock on the following morning Bud Turner rolled from his
saddle in front of the Nopalito ranch-house, and stumbled with whizzing
rowels toward the gallery. Bud was in charge of the bunch of
beef-cattle that was to strike the trail that morning for San Antonio.
Mrs. Yeager was on the gallery watering a cluster of hyacinths growing
in a red earthenware jar.

“King” McAllister had bequeathed to his daughter many of his strong
characteristics—his resolution, his gay courage, his contumacious
self-reliance, his pride as a reigning monarch of hoofs and horns.
_Allegro_ and _fortissimo_ had been McAllister’s temp and tone. In
Santa they survived, transposed to the feminine key. Substantially, she
preserved the image of the mother who had been summoned to wander in
other and less finite green pastures long before the waxing herds of
kine had conferred royalty upon the house. She had her mother’s slim,
strong figure and grave, soft prettiness that relieved in her the
severity of the imperious McAllister eye and the McAllister air of
royal independence.

Webb stood on one end of the gallery giving orders to two or three
sub-bosses of various camps and outfits who had ridden in for
instructions.

“Morning,” said Bud briefly. “Where do you want them beeves to go in
town—to Barber’s, as usual?”

Now, to answer that had been the prerogative of the queen. All the
reins of business—buying, selling, and banking—had been held by her
capable fingers. The handling of cattle had been entrusted fully to her
husband. In the days of “King” McAllister, Santa had been his secretary
and helper; and she had continued her work with wisdom and profit. But
before she could reply, the prince-consort spake up with calm decision:

“You drive that bunch to Zimmerman and Nesbit’s pens. I spoke to
Zimmerman about it some time ago.”

Bud turned on his high boot-heels.

“Wait!” called Santa quickly. She looked at her husband with surprise
in her steady gray eyes.

“Why, what do you mean, Webb?” she asked, with a small wrinkle
gathering between her brows. “I never deal with Zimmerman and Nesbit.
Barber has handled every head of stock from this ranch in that market
for five years. I’m not going to take the business out of his hands.”
She faced Bud Turner. “Deliver those cattle to Barber,” she concluded
positively.

Bud gazed impartially at the water-jar hanging on the gallery, stood on
his other leg, and chewed a mesquite-leaf.

“I want this bunch of beeves to go to Zimmerman and Nesbit,” said Webb,
with a frosty light in his blue eyes.

“Nonsense,” said Santa impatiently. “You’d better start on, Bud, so as
to noon at the Little Elm water-hole. Tell Barber we’ll have another
lot of culls ready in about a month.”

Bud allowed a hesitating eye to steal upward and meet Webb’s. Webb saw
apology in his look, and fancied he saw commiseration.

“You deliver them cattle,” he said grimly, “to—”

“Barber,” finished Santa sharply. “Let that settle it. Is there
anything else you are waiting for, Bud?”

“No, m’m,” said Bud. But before going he lingered while a cow’s tail
could have switched thrice; for man is man’s ally; and even the
Philistines must have blushed when they took Samson in the way they
did.

“You hear your boss!” cried Webb sardonically. He took off his hat, and
bowed until it touched the floor before his wife.

“Webb,” said Santa rebukingly, “you’re acting mighty foolish to-day.”

“Court fool, your Majesty,” said Webb, in his slow tones, which had
changed their quality. “What else can you expect? Let me tell you. I
was a man before I married a cattle-queen. What am I now? The
laughing-stock of the camps. I’ll be a man again.”

Santa looked at him closely.

“Don’t be unreasonable, Webb,” she said calmly. “You haven’t been
slighted in any way. Do I ever interfere in your management of the
cattle? I know the business side of the ranch much better than you do.
I learned it from Dad. Be sensible.”

“Kingdoms and queendoms,” said Webb, “don’t suit me unless I am in the
pictures, too. I punch the cattle and you wear the crown. All right.
I’d rather be High Lord Chancellor of a cow-camp than the eight-spot in
a queen-high flush. It’s your ranch; and Barber gets the beeves.”

Webb’s horse was tied to the rack. He walked into the house and brought
out his roll of blankets that he never took with him except on long
rides, and his “slicker,” and his longest stake-rope of plaited
raw-hide. These he began to tie deliberately upon his saddle. Santa, a
little pale, followed him.

Webb swung up into the saddle. His serious, smooth face was without
expression except for a stubborn light that smouldered in his eyes.

“There’s a herd of cows and calves,” said he, “near the Hondo
water-hole on the Frio that ought to be moved away from timber. Lobos
have killed three of the calves. I forgot to leave orders. You’d better
tell Simms to attend to it.”

Santa laid a hand on the horse’s bridle, and looked her husband in the
eye.

“Are you going to leave me, Webb?” she asked quietly.

“I am going to be a man again,” he answered.

“I wish you success in a praiseworthy attempt,” she said, with a sudden
coldness. She turned and walked directly into the house.

Webb Yeager rode to the southeast as straight as the topography of West
Texas permitted. And when he reached the horizon he might have ridden
on into blue space as far as knowledge of him on the Nopalito went. And
the days, with Sundays at their head, formed into hebdomadal squads;
and the weeks, captained by the full moon, closed ranks into menstrual
companies crying “Tempus fugit” on their banners; and the months
marched on toward the vast camp-ground of the years; but Webb Yeager
came no more to the dominions of his queen.

One day a being named Bartholomew, a sheep-man—and therefore of little
account—from the lower Rio Grande country, rode in sight of the
Nopalito ranch-house, and felt hunger assail him. _Ex consuetudine_ he
was soon seated at the mid-day dining table of that hospitable kingdom.
Talk like water gushed from him: he might have been smitten with
Aaron’s rod—that is your gentle shepherd when an audience is vouchsafed
him whose ears are not overgrown with wool.

“Missis Yeager,” he babbled, “I see a man the other day on the Rancho
Seco down in Hidalgo County by your name—Webb Yeager was his. He’d just
been engaged as manager. He was a tall, light-haired man, not saying
much. Perhaps he was some kin of yours, do you think?”

“A husband,” said Santa cordially. “The Seco has done well. Mr. Yeager
is one of the best stockmen in the West.”

The dropping out of a prince-consort rarely disorganises a monarchy.
Queen Santa had appointed as _mayordomo_ of the ranch a trusty subject,
named Ramsay, who had been one of her father’s faithful vassals. And
there was scarcely a ripple on the Nopalito ranch save when the
gulf-breeze created undulations in the grass of its wide acres.

For several years the Nopalito had been making experiments with an
English breed of cattle that looked down with aristocratic contempt
upon the Texas long-horns. The experiments were found satisfactory; and
a pasture had been set aside for the blue-bloods. The fame of them had
gone forth into the chaparral and pear as far as men ride in saddles.
Other ranches woke up, rubbed their eyes, and looked with new
dissatisfaction upon the long-horns.

As a consequence, one day a sunburned, capable, silk-kerchiefed
nonchalant youth, garnished with revolvers, and attended by three
Mexican _vaqueros_, alighted at the Nopalito ranch and presented the
following business-like epistle to the queen thereof:

Mrs. Yeager—The Nopalito Ranch:
    Dear Madam:
    I am instructed by the owners of the Rancho Seco to purchase 100
    head of two and three-year-old cows of the Sussex breed owned by
    you. If you can fill the order please deliver the cattle to the
    bearer; and a check will be forwarded to you at once.


Respectfully,
Webster Yeager,
Manager the Rancho Seco.


Business is business, even—very scantily did it escape being written
“especially”—in a kingdom.

That night the 100 head of cattle were driven up from the pasture and
penned in a corral near the ranch-house for delivery in the morning.

When night closed down and the house was still, did Santa Yeager throw
herself down, clasping that formal note to her bosom, weeping, and
calling out a name that pride (either in one or the other) had kept
from her lips many a day? Or did she file the letter, in her business
way, retaining her royal balance and strength?

Wonder, if you will; but royalty is sacred; and there is a veil. But
this much you shall learn:

At midnight Santa slipped softly out of the ranch-house, clothed in
something dark and plain. She paused for a moment under the live-oak
trees. The prairies were somewhat dim, and the moonlight was pale
orange, diluted with particles of an impalpable, flying mist. But the
mock-bird whistled on every bough of vantage; leagues of flowers
scented the air; and a kindergarten of little shadowy rabbits leaped
and played in an open space near by. Santa turned her face to the
southeast and threw three kisses thitherward; for there was none to
see.

Then she sped silently to the blacksmith-shop, fifty yards away; and
what she did there can only be surmised. But the forge glowed red; and
there was a faint hammering such as Cupid might make when he sharpens
his arrow-points.

Later she came forth with a queer-shaped, handled thing in one hand,
and a portable furnace, such as are seen in branding-camps, in the
other. To the corral where the Sussex cattle were penned she sped with
these things swiftly in the moonlight.

She opened the gate and slipped inside the corral. The Sussex cattle
were mostly a dark red. But among this bunch was one that was milky
white—notable among the others.

And now Santa shook from her shoulder something that we had not seen
before—a rope lasso. She freed the loop of it, coiling the length in
her left hand, and plunged into the thick of the cattle.

The white cow was her object. She swung the lasso, which caught one
horn and slipped off. The next throw encircled the forefeet and the
animal fell heavily. Santa made for it like a panther; but it scrambled
up and dashed against her, knocking her over like a blade of grass.

Again she made her cast, while the aroused cattle milled around the
four sides of the corral in a plunging mass. This throw was fair; the
white cow came to earth again; and before it could rise Santa had made
the lasso fast around a post of the corral with a swift and simple
knot, and had leaped upon the cow again with the rawhide hobbles.

In one minute the feet of the animal were tied (no record-breaking
deed) and Santa leaned against the corral for the same space of time,
panting and lax.

And then she ran swiftly to her furnace at the gate and brought the
branding-iron, queerly shaped and white-hot.

The bellow of the outraged white cow, as the iron was applied, should
have stirred the slumbering auricular nerves and consciences of the
near-by subjects of the Nopalito, but it did not. And it was amid the
deepest nocturnal silence that Santa ran like a lapwing back to the
ranch-house and there fell upon a cot and sobbed—sobbed as though
queens had hearts as simple ranchmen’s wives have, and as though she
would gladly make kings of prince-consorts, should they ride back again
from over the hills and far away.

In the morning the capable, revolvered youth and his _vaqueros_ set
forth, driving the bunch of Sussex cattle across the prairies to the
Rancho Seco. Ninety miles it was; a six days’ journey, grazing and
watering the animals on the way.

The beasts arrived at Rancho Seco one evening at dusk; and were
received and counted by the foreman of the ranch.

The next morning at eight o’clock a horseman loped out of the brush to
the Nopalito ranch-house. He dismounted stiffly, and strode, with
whizzing spurs, to the house. His horse gave a great sigh and swayed
foam-streaked, with down-drooping head and closed eyes.

But waste not your pity upon Belshazzar, the flea-bitten sorrel.
To-day, in Nopalito horse-pasture he survives, pampered, beloved,
unridden, cherished record-holder of long-distance rides.

The horseman stumbled into the house. Two arms fell around his neck,
and someone cried out in the voice of woman and queen alike: “Webb— oh,
Webb!”

“I was a skunk,” said Webb Yeager.

“Hush,” said Santa, “did you see it?”

“I saw it,” said Webb.

What they meant God knows; and you shall know, if you rightly read the
primer of events.

“Be the cattle-queen,” said Webb; “and overlook it if you can. I was a
mangy, sheep-stealing coyote.”

“Hush!” said Santa again, laying her fingers upon his mouth. “There’s
no queen here. Do you know who I am? I am Santa Yeager, First Lady of
the Bedchamber. Come here.”

She dragged him from the gallery into the room to the right. There
stood a cradle with an infant in it—a red, ribald, unintelligible,
babbling, beautiful infant, sputtering at life in an unseemly manner.

“There’s no queen on this ranch,” said Santa again. “Look at the king.
He’s got your eyes, Webb. Down on your knees and look at his Highness.”

But jingling rowels sounded on the gallery, and Bud Turner stumbled
there again with the same query that he had brought, lacking a few
days, a year ago.

“‘Morning. Them beeves is just turned out on the trail. Shall I drive
’em to Barber’s, or—”

He saw Webb and stopped, open-mouthed.

“Ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba!” shrieked the king in his cradle, beating the air
with his fists.

“You hear your boss, Bud,” said Webb Yeager, with a broad grin—just as
he had said a year ago.

And that is all, except that when old man Quinn, owner of the Rancho
Seco, went out to look over the herd of Sussex cattle that he had
bought from the Nopalito ranch, he asked his new manager:

“What’s the Nopalito ranch brand, Wilson?”

“X Bar Y,” said Wilson.

“I thought so,” said Quinn. “But look at that white heifer there; she’s
got another brand—a heart with a cross inside of it. What brand is
that?”




II
THE RANSOM OF MACK


Me and old Mack Lonsbury, we got out of that Little Hide-and-Seek gold
mine affair with about $40,000 apiece. I say “old” Mack; but he wasn’t
old. Forty-one, I should say; but he always seemed old.

“Andy,” he says to me, “I’m tired of hustling. You and me have been
working hard together for three years. Say we knock off for a while,
and spend some of this idle money we’ve coaxed our way.”

“The proposition hits me just right,” says I. “Let’s be nabobs for a
while and see how it feels. What’ll we do—take in the Niagara Falls, or
buck at faro?”

“For a good many years,” says Mack, “I’ve thought that if I ever had
extravagant money I’d rent a two-room cabin somewhere, hire a Chinaman
to cook, and sit in my stocking feet and read Buckle’s History of
Civilisation.”

“That sounds self-indulgent and gratifying without vulgar ostentation,”
says I; “and I don’t see how money could be better invested. Give me a
cuckoo clock and a Sep Winner’s Self-Instructor for the Banjo, and I’ll
join you.”

A week afterwards me and Mack hits this small town of Piña, about
thirty miles out from Denver, and finds an elegant two-room house that
just suits us. We deposited half-a-peck of money in the Piña bank and
shook hands with every one of the 340 citizens in the town. We brought
along the Chinaman and the cuckoo clock and Buckle and the Instructor
with us from Denver; and they made the cabin seem like home at once.

Never believe it when they tell you riches don’t bring happiness. If
you could have seen old Mack sitting in his rocking-chair with his
blue-yarn sock feet up in the window and absorbing in that Buckle stuff
through his specs you’d have seen a picture of content that would have
made Rockefeller jealous. And I was learning to pick out “Old Zip Coon”
on the banjo, and the cuckoo was on time with his remarks, and Ah Sing
was messing up the atmosphere with the handsomest smell of ham and eggs
that ever laid the honeysuckle in the shade. When it got too dark to
make out Buckle’s nonsense and the notes in the Instructor, me and Mack
would light our pipes and talk about science and pearl diving and
sciatica and Egypt and spelling and fish and trade-winds and leather
and gratitude and eagles, and a lot of subjects that we’d never had
time to explain our sentiments about before.

One evening Mack spoke up and asked me if I was much apprised in the
habits and policies of women folks.

“Why, yes,” says I, in a tone of voice; “I know ’em from Alfred to
Omaha. The feminine nature and similitude,” says I, “is as plain to my
sight as the Rocky Mountains is to a blue-eyed burro. I’m onto all
their little side-steps and punctual discrepancies.”

“I tell you, Andy,” says Mack, with a kind of sigh, “I never had the
least amount of intersection with their predispositions. Maybe I might
have had a proneness in respect to their vicinity, but I never took the
time. I made my own living since I was fourteen; and I never seemed to
get my ratiocinations equipped with the sentiments usually depicted
toward the sect. I sometimes wish I had,” says old Mack.

“They’re an adverse study,” says I, “and adapted to points of view.
Although they vary in rationale, I have found ’em quite often obviously
differing from each other in divergences of contrast.”

“It seems to me,” goes on Mack, “that a man had better take ’em in and
secure his inspirations of the sect when he’s young and so preordained.
I let my chance go by; and I guess I’m too old now to go hopping into
the curriculum.”

“Oh, I don’t know,” I tells him. “Maybe you better credit yourself with
a barrel of money and a lot of emancipation from a quantity of
uncontent. Still, I don’t regret my knowledge of ’em,” I says. “It
takes a man who understands the symptoms and by-plays of women-folks to
take care of himself in this world.”

We stayed on in Piña because we liked the place. Some folks might enjoy
their money with noise and rapture and locomotion; but me and Mack we
had had plenty of turmoils and hotel towels. The people were friendly;
Ah Sing got the swing of the grub we liked; Mack and Buckle were as
thick as two body-snatchers, and I was hitting out a cordial
resemblance to “Buffalo Gals, Can’t You Come Out To-night,” on the
banjo.

One day I got a telegram from Speight, the man that was working on a
mine I had an interest in out in New Mexico. I had to go out there; and
I was gone two months. I was anxious to get back to Piña and enjoy life
once more.

When I struck the cabin I nearly fainted. Mack was standing in the
door; and if angels ever wept, I saw no reason why they should be
smiling then.

That man was a spectacle. Yes; he was worse; he was a spyglass; he was
the great telescope in the Lick Observatory. He had on a coat and shiny
shoes and a white vest and a high silk hat; and a geranium as big as an
order of spinach was spiked onto his front. And he was smirking and
warping his face like an infernal storekeeper or a kid with colic.

“Hello, Andy,” says Mack, out of his face. “Glad to see you back.
Things have happened since you went away.”

“I know it,” says I, “and a sacrilegious sight it is. God never made
you that way, Mack Lonsbury. Why do you scarify His works with this
presumptuous kind of ribaldry?”

“Why, Andy,” says he, “they’ve elected me justice of the peace since
you left.”

I looked at Mack close. He was restless and inspired. A justice of the
peace ought to be disconsolate and assuaged.

Just then a young woman passed on the sidewalk; and I saw Mack kind of
half snicker and blush, and then he raised up his hat and smiled and
bowed, and she smiled and bowed, and went on by.

“No hope for you,” says I, “if you’ve got the Mary-Jane infirmity at
your age. I thought it wasn’t going to take on you. And patent leather
shoes! All this in two little short months!”

“I’m going to marry the young lady who just passed to-night,” says
Mack, in a kind of flutter.

“I forgot something at the post-office,” says I, and walked away quick.

I overtook that young woman a hundred yards away. I raised my hat and
told her my name. She was about nineteen; and young for her age. She
blushed, and then looked at me cool, like I was the snow scene from the
“Two Orphans.”

“I understand you are to be married to-night,” I said.

“Correct,” says she. “You got any objections?”

“Listen, sissy,” I begins.

“My name is Miss Rebosa Redd,” says she in a pained way.

“I know it,” says I. “Now, Rebosa, I’m old enough to have owed money to
your father. And that old, specious, dressed-up, garbled, sea-sick
ptomaine prancing about avidiously like an irremediable turkey gobbler
with patent leather shoes on is my best friend. Why did you go and get
him invested in this marriage business?”

“Why, he was the only chance there was,” answers Miss Rebosa.

“Nay,” says I, giving a sickening look of admiration at her complexion
and style of features; “with your beauty you might pick any kind of a
man. Listen, Rebosa. Old Mack ain’t the man you want. He was twenty-two
when you was _née_ Reed, as the papers say. This bursting into bloom
won’t last with him. He’s all ventilated with oldness and rectitude and
decay. Old Mack’s down with a case of Indian summer. He overlooked his
bet when he was young; and now he’s suing Nature for the interest on
the promissory note he took from Cupid instead of the cash. Rebosa, are
you bent on having this marriage occur?”

“Why, sure I am,” says she, oscillating the pansies on her hat, “and so
is somebody else, I reckon.”

“What time is it to take place?” I asks.

“At six o’clock,” says she.

I made up my mind right away what to do. I’d save old Mack if I could.
To have a good, seasoned, ineligible man like that turn chicken for a
girl that hadn’t quit eating slate pencils and buttoning in the back
was more than I could look on with easiness.

“Rebosa,” says I, earnest, drawing upon my display of knowledge
concerning the feminine intuitions of reason—“ain’t there a young man
in Piña—a nice young man that you think a heap of?”

“Yep,” says Rebosa, nodding her pansies—“Sure there is! What do you
think! Gracious!”

“Does he like you?” I asks. “How does he stand in the matter?”

“Crazy,” says Rebosa. “Ma has to wet down the front steps to keep him
from sitting there all the time. But I guess that’ll be all over after
to-night,” she winds up with a sigh.

“Rebosa,” says I, “you don’t really experience any of this adoration
called love for old Mack, do you?”

“Lord! no,” says the girl, shaking her head. “I think he’s as dry as a
lava bed. The idea!”

“Who is this young man that you like, Rebosa?” I inquires.

“It’s Eddie Bayles,” says she. “He clerks in Crosby’s grocery. But he
don’t make but thirty-five a month. Ella Noakes was wild about him
once.”

“Old Mack tells me,” I says, “that he’s going to marry you at six
o’clock this evening.”

“That’s the time,” says she. “It’s to be at our house.”

“Rebosa,” says I, “listen to me. If Eddie Bayles had a thousand dollars
cash—a thousand dollars, mind you, would buy him a store of his own—if
you and Eddie had that much to excuse matrimony on, would you consent
to marry him this evening at five o’clock?”

The girl looks at me a minute; and I can see these inaudible
cogitations going on inside of her, as women will.

“A thousand dollars?” says she. “Of course I would.”

“Come on,” says I. “We’ll go and see Eddie.”

We went up to Crosby’s store and called Eddie outside. He looked to be
estimable and freckled; and he had chills and fever when I made my
proposition.

“At five o’clock?” says he, “for a thousand dollars? Please don’t wake
me up! Well, you _are_ the rich uncle retired from the spice business
in India! I’ll buy out old Crosby and run the store myself.”

We went inside and got old man Crosby apart and explained it. I wrote
my check for a thousand dollars and handed it to him. If Eddie and
Rebosa married each other at five he was to turn the money over to
them.

And then I gave ’em my blessing, and went to wander in the wildwood for
a season. I sat on a log and made cogitations on life and old age and
the zodiac and the ways of women and all the disorder that goes with a
lifetime. I passed myself congratulations that I had probably saved my
old friend Mack from his attack of Indian summer. I knew when he got
well of it and shed his infatuation and his patent leather shoes, he
would feel grateful. “To keep old Mack disinvolved,” thinks I, “from
relapses like this, is worth more than a thousand dollars.” And most of
all I was glad that I’d made a study of women, and wasn’t to be
deceived any by their means of conceit and evolution.

It must have been half-past five when I got back home. I stepped in;
and there sat old Mack on the back of his neck in his old clothes with
his blue socks on the window and the History of Civilisation propped up
on his knees.

“This don’t look like getting ready for a wedding at six,” I says, to
seem innocent.

“Oh,” says Mack, reaching for his tobacco, “that was postponed back to
five o’clock. They sent me over a note saying the hour had been
changed. It’s all over now. What made you stay away so long, Andy?”

“You heard about the wedding?” I asks.

“I operated it,” says he. “I told you I was justice of the peace. The
preacher is off East to visit his folks, and I’m the only one in town
that can perform the dispensations of marriage. I promised Eddie and
Rebosa a month ago I’d marry ’em. He’s a busy lad; and he’ll have a
grocery of his own some day.”

“He will,” says I.

“There was lots of women at the wedding,” says Mack, smoking up. “But I
didn’t seem to get any ideas from ’em. I wish I was informed in the
structure of their attainments like you said you was.”

“That was two months ago,” says I, reaching up for the banjo.
